                   muq/pkg/%README%   last update: 97Jul11

This directory contains the standard muf libraries, in the form of
".t" (texinfo) files from which the actual code is extracted (via
Muq-detexify) during the load process.

These are loaded into db/ (&tc) by bin/muq-db-init when
creating a new db from scratch, or may be loaded into an
existing db when repairing or updating it (using muq-lib
or muq-c-lib).

These are NOT loaded automatically each time the muq is
restarted.

The Muq selftest muf code lives in muq/pkg/Check, and is
also somewhat useful as a set of examples of using the
various muf operators;  It is run by doing "make check"
in muq/c.



FILENAME KEY
------------

Library files have names like

  140-C-defstruct.t

where the parts mean:

  140  Muq installs the files in the order specified by
      the leading digits.  This makes sure that, for
      example, 030-C-struct.t gets loaded before
      110-C-compile.t, which depends on it.

  C   The leading letter specifies the file category,
      and will be one of the following:

      C  A core file.  It is presumed that all Muq
         servers will install all of these, and hence
         that portable Muq code can depend on the code
         in them being present.  If you choose not to
         install one of these files, you should expect
         various things to break.

      W  A work-in-progress.  You can freely delete
         these if you like.

      X  A coding example of some sort.  You may freely
         delete these in a production system.

      O  Optional utility of some sort.  You may delete
         any of these which you are not using.

  defstruct
      A string intended to be humanly mnemonic of the
      file contents.

  .t
      An extension indicating the contents are in a
      format which can be processed either into infotex
      source (and thence TeX, HTML &tc) for documentation
      purposes, or else into MUF source for compilation.
      (Translation is done automatically by the Makefiles
      and muq-db-* scripts -- no hand translation is needed.)

